Design: Add Design document for Backfill Plugin (#1288)
hiero-ledger/hiero-block-node: docs/design/backfill-plugin.md

# Backfill Plugin Design Document

## Table of Contents

1. [Purpose](#purpose)
2. [Goals](#goals)
3. [Terms](#terms)
4. [Entities](#entities)
5. [Design](#design)
6. [Diagram](#diagram)
7. [Configuration](#configuration)
8. [Metrics](#metrics)
9. [Exceptions](#exceptions)
10. [Acceptance Tests](#acceptance-tests)

## Purpose

This plugin purpose is to detect missing gaps in the intended stored block sequence, then autonomously and asynchronously fetch the missing blocks from another source and store them.

## Goals

> 1. Detect gaps on start-up an while running.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Detect gaps on start-up and while running.
```

Author: ✅  Done!

> 2. Fetch missing blocks from another BN, most be configurable.

Reviewer: Maybe a typo here?
```suggestion
2. Fetch missing blocks from another BN, must be configurable.
```

Author: ✅  Done!

> 3. Asynchronously recovery (fetch and store) the missing blocks, without blocking the live ingestion path (new coming blocks).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Asynchronously recover (fetch and store) the missing blocks, without blocking the live ingestion path (new incoming blocks).
```

4. Instrumentation, logging, metrics and error handling for the backfill process.

## Terms

<dl>
  <dt>Missing Gap</dt>
  <dd>Its a contiguous range of missing blocks, could be a single one.</dd>
  <dt>Backfill</dt>

>   <dd>The process of fetching and storing missing blocks in the local storage.</dd>

Reviewer: Do we go through verification after fetching?

Author: Yes, we cannot Persist a Block that has not gonne trought Verification

    <dt>Grpc Client</dt>

>     <dd>A client that connects to another Block Node to fetch missing blocks.</dd>

Author: ✅ Done! now it should be correct 👍

> 

Reviewer 2: Small spacing error here.

3. If gaps are found, it will initiate the backfill process as described in the Autonomous Backfill section.
4. The process will be the same as the Autonomous Backfill, but it will be triggered by the `NewestBlockKnownToNetwork` message instead of the periodic scan.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    autonumber
    participant PublisherPlugin
    participant MessagingFacility
    participant BackfillPlugin
    participant HistoricalBlockFacility
    participant GrpcClient

    %% Trigger
    PublisherPlugin->>MessagingFacility: NewestBlockKnownToNetwork(latestBlock)

    %% Dispatch to backfill
    MessagingFacility->>BackfillPlugin: NewestBlockKnownToNetwork(latestBlock)
    BackfillPlugin->>HistoricalBlockFacility: detectMissingGaps(…, latestBlock)

    alt Gaps found
        BackfillPlugin->>GrpcClient: fetchMissingBlocks(gapRange, batchSize)
        GrpcClient-->>BackfillPlugin: blocks[]
        BackfillPlugin->>MessagingFacility: BackfilledBlockNotification(blocks)
    else No gaps
        BackfillPlugin-->>MessagingFacility: no gaps → no action
    end

```

### gRPC Client

> The gRPC client is used to connect to another Block Node to fetch the missing blocks. It will be configured with the `backfill_sources` parameter, which is a list of HOST:PORT pairs of the Block Nodes to connect to.

Reviewer 2: An external file (pointed to by config) is a good idea.
My primary point is just that host:port pairs are probably not sufficient.

> The gRPC client is used to connect to another Block Node to fetch the missing blocks. It will be configured with the `backfill_sources` parameter, which is a list of HOST:PORT pairs of the Block Nodes to connect to.

Author: My original idea was to set priority by Order of appearance on the list, and since we have some in-flux design for BN Address Book, I would go with this simpler approach atm, to simplify and expedite the feature to live, and once we have more certainty of the BN Address Book inner working and a more final structure for the BN json file. we can change it down the road, is always easier to add complexity than to remove it.

- Fetching blocks will be done in batches, the size of which can be configured with the `backfill.fetchBatchSize` parameter.

> - For each BN configured, the client will perform an `BlockNodeService/serverStatus` call to check if the missing gap is available in the remote BN, if it is not available, it will skip that BN and continue with the next one.

Author: I disagree, I believe that a query to `server/status` is really cheap and fast, and the backfill plugin knows if it has a partial range available, a full range available or none.

> - If the remote BN is not available, it will log an error and continue with the next one.

Author: ✅ Done!

- If the BN has the missing blocks, it will fetch them in batches using the `BlockStreamSubscribeService/subscribeBlockStream`
- If none of the configured BNs have the missing blocks, it will log an info and continue with the next iteration after the configured interval.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    A[Request Range of Blocks] --> B
    B[Iterate over backfill_sources]
    C{Call serverStatus on current BN}
    C -->|Error unreachable| E1[Log BN unreachable, continue]
    C -->|Gap not available| E2[Log Gap not available, continue]
    C -->|Gap available| D[Call subscribeBlockStream gapRange, batchSize]
    D --> F[Return fetched blocks to BackfillPlugin]
    F --> G[End successful fetch]
    E1 --> B
    E2 --> B
    B --> H{All sources tried?}
    H -->|No| C
    H -->|Yes| E3[Log No configured BN had missing blocks]
    E3 --> I[Exit, retry after scanInterval]

```

## Configuration

|     Configuration Property     |                                     Description                                      | Default |
|--------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------|

> | `backfill.firstBlockAvailable` | The first block that this BN deploy wants to have available                          | 0       |

Reviewer: firstBlockAvailable == 0 default is probably not a good idea. As a default maybe we should have -1 to mean whatever is the first block you receive via the regular stream (or if you already have something persisted, the lowest number you have is the one you want to have lowest available), that would be the first one you want to have. Zero is a valid block number and would essentially mean full history.

Author: Let me think more about this, thanks for the idea.

Reviewer 2: I would advocate for a default of `0`.  The default should be "full history" and any node not wanting that can set a different value.
It's probably lower risk to make the most critical systems (Tier 1 full history) the defaults.

Author: I agree with @jsync-swirlds in this one, "The first block received" is too ambiguous and prone to indeterministic behaviour and tests

9. [Exceptions](#exceptions)
10. [Acceptance Tests](#acceptance-tests)

## Purpose

This plugin purpose is to detect missing gaps in the intended stored block sequence, then autonomously and asynchronously fetch the missing blocks from another source and store them.

## Goals

1. Detect gaps on start-up and while running.
2. Fetch missing blocks from another BN, must be configurable.
3. Asynchronously recover (fetch and store) the missing blocks, without blocking the live ingestion path (new incoming blocks).
4. Instrumentation, logging, metrics and error handling for the backfill process.

## Terms

<dl>
  <dt>Missing Gap</dt>
  <dd>Its a contiguous range of missing blocks, could be a single one.</dd>
  <dt>Backfill</dt>
  <dd>The process of fetching and storing missing blocks in the local storage.</dd>
  <dt>Grpc Client</dt>
  <dd>A client that connects to another Block Node to fetch missing blocks.</dd>
  <dt>BackfilledBlockNotification</dt>
  <dd>A new Notification Type that can be published to the Messaging Facility, it is intended to contain a whole block that was fetched from another source and is being backfilled into the system. </dd>
  <dt>NewestBlockKnownToNetwork</dt>

>   <dd>Commonly sent by the Publisher Plugin to indicate that the BlockNode is behind and that needs to get up-to-date, commonly picked handled by Backfill plugin and filling the gap immediately.</dd>

Reviewer 2: Wording suggestion:
```suggestion
  <dd>Notification sent by a plugin, including a "publisher" plugin, to indicate that the BlockNode is behind and must be brought up-to-date. This is often handled by a "backfill" plugin by immediately requesting the missing blocks.</dd>
```
